Good afternoon.
Welcome to session 906.
I'm Anders Bertelrud.
I'm an Xcode architect.
And in this session,
we're going to take another look at
Xcode and some of the developer tools,
but do it a little bit differently than
what you may be seeing in the past.
In the past few days,
you've seen many examples and demos,
introductions to Apple's developer tools.
Here, we're assuming you are the
experienced developers.
You come maybe from
Visual Studio or Eclipse,
have that kind of background.
So here, we'll want to give you maybe
a little bit of a broader
overview of the toolbox we have,
show how it fits together,
especially how it relates to
Visual Studio and Eclipse in particular.
To do that,
we'll be taking a look at a sample
project that you've already seen,
but we're going to take it a little
bit further than you've seen in
any of the previous sessions.
And we'll do that in order to
illustrate some of the differences.
And some of the things that are
maybe the same with Visual Studio,
Eclipse,
vis-a-vis Apple's developer tools.
The goal here is not
to give you a tutorial,
but to show you the tools,
how they fit together,
give you a taste of their capabilities,
and help direct you to further
resources like some of the
great sessions we have coming up
tomorrow and the rest of the week,
and also in our documentation.
[Transcript missing]
A new one I want to show that
maybe you have not seen yet,
this WWDC, is Quartz Composer,
which allows you to edit rich media
content and then connect that into
your user interface and your code.
So we'll be taking a look at that.
And of course, Instruments,
which is our central place to analyze
your program to see how you can tune it.
And it's a multi-track recording of your
performance metrics for your program.
Under the Utilities folder,
we have a bunch of other programmer
tools that you may not have heard of.
There's tools for comparing
files and file hierarchies.
There's a tool called Package
Maker that we'll talk about today,
which is for creating installer packages.
Under the Graphics tools,
we have OpenGL Shader Builder,
which is great if you
want to develop shaders,
debug them, and other graphics
tools for high DPI work,
that kind of a thing, testing.
Under Performance Tools, we have Shark,
which is a great tool for more
instruction-level analysis of your code,
and OpenGL Profiler or
some other tools like that.
That's the basics developer tools folder.
Many of these icons are
already familiar to you.
Where do we begin?
Well, Xcode.
That's the center of the
developer experience.
I just want to give you a demo rather
than show you a bunch of slides.
Let me show you some things.
In particular,
I want to highlight some things.
It may be similar with
Visual Studio or Eclipse,
which you may be used to.
Could we have Demo Machine 1, please?
Thanks.
So let me start Xcode.
And one of the first things
you see is the Welcome panel.
And many of you may just
click to close this,
but there's actually a lot
of information here for you.
Obviously,
there's the iPhone Developer Center and
the Mac Developer Center.
Just lots of great introductions,
not only to the APIs,
but also to some things like the system
concepts that may be different for you if
you're coming from another environment.
We have live Xcode news that
goes out to Apple's web pages and
fetches the latest updated samples,
those kinds of things, mailing lists,
and all kinds of stuff like that.
But to get started here,
I want to show you, first of all,
what you typically do
is create new projects.
We've all seen this at this point.
Let me resize this.
We have, obviously,
both the Mac OS and the
iPhone OS templates,
as you've heard several times already,
Xcode Interface Builder.
and instruments are Apple's developer
tools for both the Mac and iPhone.
What I'm going to do here though
today is to show something a
little bit more interesting maybe.
We also have good
SCM integration with subversion,
CVS, and Perforce.
And I showed you here how to
configure the repositories.
I just brought up the preference panel.
I'm going to go ahead and
browse the repositories.
And I'm just accessing a local source
code repository that I have on disk here.
And let's take the demo app that
Todd and Andreas showed in the
State of the Union yesterday.
I'm just going to drag
this out into the desktop.
What I'm doing here is I'm
looking at my repository.
I can browse it.
I can say I get info and look at the
check-in history of any given file,
all kinds of stuff like that.
At this point, I've checked out a project
from the repository just by
dragging it to the desktop.
I'm going to close the repository
and just open up the project.
So I'm doing this because
I want to give an overview of
what's in an Xcode project,
specifically if you're coming
from Studio or Eclipse.
So at the top, of course,
we have a toolbar.
Whoops.
I wanted to create a nice
little box like that.
So we have a toolbar up at the top,
fairly typical.
And on then the right-hand side, sorry,
the left-hand side,
we have the contents of the project.
So up at the very top, we have just plain
hierarchy of references.
If you're coming from Visual Studio,
a project is kind of like a solution.
And then the projects underneath
in Visual Studio correspond
to Xcode's targets.
If you're coming from Eclipse,
this should also look fairly familiar.
It's a hierarchy of references
up in the left here.
So all your source code is here.
The source code itself lives on disk.
We don't try to have a database
with all your code in it.
We still want to keep things
as flat files so you can use
any tools you like on them,
such as text editors.
But we reference them from the project.
By clicking on the project here,
on the group here,
I see my files that are in that group.
And obviously clicking on one,
I see the source code down here.
If the code here actually mattered,
then this would have
been too small of a font.
But I just want to get the
general picture across.
Underneath the groups here,
we have targets.
And let me highlight that briefly.
Targets are the individual
instructions for building a project,
building some code from your source code.
And then executables underneath
that show how to launch a particular
program with a set of flags.
Let's say you want to launch it
with a set of test documents,
those kinds of things.
. Underneath that down here,
we have other smart groups.
And this looks a lot like iTunes, right?
You can click on a smart group and see,
let's say,
all the files that have errors in them,
all the files that have find results or
that have been touched in terms of SCM,
those kinds of things,
source code management.
And you can define your own
custom smart groups as well.
So at this point,
I want to go back and explain
some more of the concepts.
I'm going to build and run the program
just so you see which one I mentioned.
It's the one that you saw probably
in the State of the Union.
I'm going to leave this
running here for the next demo.
And if we go back to slides, please.
Thanks.
So what do we just do?
Well, we create a project.
And again, a project is a container for
all the parts of your software.
It's the source code and the
instructions for building it,
those kinds of things.
And when you decide
what to make a project,
well, usually it corresponds
to a software concept.
It could be your whole program,
it could be a project.
Or you could have a project
for each library that you use,
that you work with,
if you have a bunch of reusable code,
and then an application
that ties that together.
Again, it contains everything that's
needed to build your product.
So that's the file references.
And again, the references,
it's not the actual code itself.
That's the same as in Studio and Eclipse,
I think, just references.
Groups, you can group the files,
the references in arbitrary ways.
You don't need to follow
the structure on disk.
You can actually group them
by function in the IDE,
different from what
it's in the file system.
There are targets,
which are the instructions
for how to build.
And then launch context,
which is simply the flags and those kinds
of things for how to test your program.
Here are some new terms on this page.
May or may not be familiar.
Projects contain targets,
and a target then has build phases,
which is compile my files,
copy my headers, those kinds of things,
copy the resources,
maybe compress the files,
those sorts of things.
Each individual file,
the decision for what happens to that
is determined by the build rules.
So a build rule is what, for example,
says that a .c file is converted
to a .o file using a compiler,
that kind of a thing.
So you can configure the build
rules to change what compiler
you invoke for a source file.
Build settings,
they are the knobs and switches
that determine all the little things
from what's the name of the thing
that I'm going to produce on disk,
what's the name of my app,
to what are some of
the optimization flags,
to search paths, those kinds of things.
This, again, is probably similar to what
you're familiar with from
Visual Studio or Eclipse,
and even GNU Make uses dollar
per n syntax for build settings.
A target can depend on other targets.
This just means that the one
target needs the other one to
be built before it is built.
Again, this is a fairly standard concept.
It may look different in our UI.
We have three targets.
One depends on the two other targets.
Not a big change,
even though the icons may be
different and those kinds of things.
Some more about the build settings.
There are specific values
of the tool options.
When you look at the
GCC manual page and terminal,
for example,
you see all kinds of switches.
Well, a lot of those,
the most important ones,
in Xcode we expose
those as build settings.
And you see these in the inspector
and you can set values for them,
such as Boolean values or enumerations,
those kinds of things.
They're organized into configurations,
which are essentially just
style sheets of build settings.
So you can have one that
you apply for a debug build,
another one for a release build,
and you can create your own as well.
There's default values for everything,
and they're arranged in a hierarchy.
You can set settings
at the project level,
at the target level.
You can set the default
values for the build settings,
et cetera,
and they'll override each other.
There's a particular type of
a file type called XC config,
which is a text-based
representation of build settings.
And that's really nice
because you can check it into
your source code repository.
You can do differences
between those kinds of things.
So you can see exactly what changes
you might have made to your settings.
[Transcript missing]
So we've talked a little bit
about some Xcode concepts.
What are some sort of behind some
of the screenshots you've seen?
Some of the system concepts
may be new to you also.
Mac OS X has this thing called a bundle.
A bundle is just a directory hierarchy
full of files and directories that are
shown to the user as a single icon,
as a single entity.
So an application, for example,
is a bundle.
And it's got resources.
It's got code.
It's got all kinds of stuff in it.
And another type of
bundle is a framework.
And that's a term that may be new to you.
That's simply a library that's bundled
together with its resources and headers,
stuff like that.
So in Eclipse, for example,
in the Java world,
this would be similar to a jar.
A bundle is essentially a jar.
In Visual Studio,
that would essentially be
the same as an assembly,
as a bunch of files and
folders that are related,
and then some metadata about that.
Bundles allow us to do
localization because a bundle can
contain multiple Lproj folders,
what's called Lproj,
and that's because the suffix is .lproj.
The Lproj folder can contain
not only string files with text,
but also UI files,
interface builder documents,
as you'll see in a demo shortly,
and also animations and splash screen
art and those kinds of things as well.
Very often what you'll do is
you'll develop in a single
language and then localizers will
localize the content and maybe even
adjust geometry of UI elements,
that kind of thing.
And then you can incorporate that
into the bundle at a later time,
shortly before you ship.
Another thing you may have heard
about is the Maco file format.
Maco is just the Mac OS X equivalent
or analog to PE or ELF.
It's a binary code format and very
similar to what you might be used
to from any other compiled platform.
Universal binaries are a way to package
multiple code files for multiple
architectures into a single file.
And the advantage of having it in
a single file is that your code can
still treat it as a single file.
So if you want to call
a command line tool,
you don't need to worry about are you
going to call the 64-bit version or
the 32-bit version or any of that.
You just call the tool,
and then the container format contains
a header at the top and then an
arbitrary number of architectures,
each of which is a Mach-O file.
So that's another concept
that may be new to you.
To continue on,
I would like to invite one
of my colleagues up on stage,
Chris Hanson, to talk to you about taking
this project further.
Thanks.
Thank you, Anders.
I'm Chris Hanson.
I also work on developer tools at Apple,
specifically on Xcode.
One thing that Cocoa provides
for you by default is
and Andy . We have an about baffle panel
in our demo application right off the
bat that Cocoa provides automatically.
It provides useful information.
It shows our icon, name, version number,
and if we put copyright
strings and so on in there,
it would also show those.
But it is a little bit plain.
So we would like to
jazz it up a little bit.
I'm going to use that as an opportunity
to show you some of the features
of the Xcode editor and later some
of the features of the interface
builder tool and Quartz Composer.
First, let's quit baffle.
Because I'm going to show you the editor,
I'm going to open up Xcode's preferences
and change our fonts up a little bit
so that they're nice and visible.
So I'm just going to kick
the font size up to about 18.
Gotta make a copy, of course.
Kick the font size up to 18.
There we are.
So the first thing I'd like to point
out is that while Xcode might look a lot
like the editors and IDEs you're used to,
there are some different
features in its editor.
For example,
we don't have tabs across the top.
Instead,
we have this handy navigation bar here.
So every editor you see is going to
have a navigation bar that lets you get
around both the code within the editor
and around your project as a whole.
One of the controls in the navigation
bar that lets you navigate around your
entire project is the history popup.
This lets you see all of the files
that you have in your project that
have been opened in that editor.
So as we navigate around in our project,
say within the views in this application,
These are accumulated into our history.
And we also have a back and forwards
button right next to our history
that let us go between all of the
files we have open in this editor.
Of course,
no code editor would be complete without
a way to see the definitions in a file.
If I go down to this view here
that has a lot of pound defines,
it has an implementation of a class,
it has some functions and methods in it,
we can navigate within the
file just using this popup.
We also have a handy popup over here
at the right that lets us see the class
hierarchy that this class descends from.
So we're in the scratchpad view,
and we can see that
it's a kind of NSView,
which is a kind of NSResponder,
which is a kind of NSObject.
And we can even select one
of those to go immediately to
the definition of that class.
And if I just hit the back button,
I get back to where I was.
We even have a popup that shows you
all of the files that you include,
and if you look at a header file,
you can even see what
includes that header.
Now, rather than write a
bunch of code for you,
I'm just going to drag in some
pre-baked code that we have here.
is going to drop it on Baffle Cocoa.
And I've added references
to this code to our project.
And the first bit of code that
I've added is our About panel.
So what I'm going to show you in our
about panel is how some of the features
work when you're actually writing code.
We have this all credits method
that just returns a collection
of credits for application.
The things that we're giving credit
to for making our application great.
One of the features we've added
new in Xcode 3.1 is something
called edit all in scope.
That lets me select this credits
path local variable here.
You can see in the other places
in this method where it's used,
it's gotten a faint underline.
That means I can either hover over it,
or choose edit all in
scope from the edit menu.
And now all of the instances
of it are highlighted.
Once they're highlighted,
I can just type and I've changed
to every place in this method.
and of course once I move my
insertion point out of it,
the highlight goes away.
Next, I'm going to retype this section of
code just to show you how some of the
code completion and research assistant
features work in the Xcode editor.
So, let's just insert a new line here.
and I start typing path.
You can see that it's completed
faintly to the right of my
insertion point in gray,
right there in my code,
rather than popping up a
list of possible completions.
To accept that,
I just have to hit tab and
it completes it for me.
I will type the next
little bit of code here,
which is NSBundle.
You can see Xcode is
proposing a completion,
but I can also hit a keystroke, control,
comma, we have a couple of different
equivalents for this,
to see a full list of possible
completions that start with NSB.
I can just navigate around this
using the arrow keys and I can
hit return or tab to accept that.
We also have a feature called
Research Assistant in our help
menu that shows you reference
documentation about your code.
So I can just resize this,
I can move it around,
I can put it in one place,
and then I can go back to
my editor and start typing.
So if I start typing, I get main bundle,
and you can see that the
Research Assistant has updated
to give me documentation on the
NSBundle classes main bundle method.
And it's only the most
relevant documentation.
It's not a complete treatise
on what that method does,
but you can see that it's also
been available since Mac OS X 10.0,
that there are several other related API.
and you can even see sample code that
uses NSBundle's main bundle method.
Now I'll go back here
and finish typing it.
And then start typing the
next bit of this method.
Now, as I type path for resource,
this is a method that
takes two arguments.
So because it takes arguments,
Xcode proposes the completion
of that method with what
we call placeholder tokens.
So if I complete this
method by pressing tab,
I immediately get one of these tokens
highlighted and you can see that the next
one to its right is faint and in blue.
We actually have keystroke
navigation between these.
So if I want to fill in
the second one first,
I can just hit control slash
and go to it immediately.
And I can just navigate between them.
And of course, when we start typing,
We replace the token.
And because this is a token
and not just text in our file,
we can even do things like
click the token and the
entire thing is highlighted.
That really cuts down on sort
of the incidental editing that
you have to do to write code.
and syntax highlighting.
The highlighting there told me
I had forgotten a double quote.
and as I typed that final bracket,
you can even see that we
highlight our brackets and
parentheses and so on for you.
I'm just going to get rid of this.
And go back to the slides.
So one thing that we didn't see in
text editing was that we also have a
great feature called Code Focus that
lets you really sort of zoom in on
only the code you're working on by
letting that be in bright colors
and fading everything around it out.
So as you go in and out
of different scopes,
the scope that you're in
is always distinct from all
of the scopes around it.
And of course, as a programming editor,
we have code folding that lets you
just get rid of parts of the code
that you don't need to see right now.
And as you saw,
we have syntax and symbol-driven
coloring in our editor.
and one thing that you may have seen, ah,
the slide has been
updated since I wrote it.
If your fingers are used to Emacs,
and that's not Emacs the Mac,
but Emacs the text editor,
they will really be pleasantly surprised
as you're working in not just Xcode,
but any Cocoa TextView.
We support many of the
common Emacs key bindings,
like control A to go to
the beginning of a line,
control E to go to the end of the line.
And I found myself just naturally typing
those because I'd been programming
on Unix before I came to the Mac,
and they just worked.
It was great.
Of course,
we saw the navigation bar and the
function or definition pop up.
We have features called jump to
definition that lets you highlight
a symbol and immediately go to
where that symbol is defined.
We have a class browser so you
can navigate a class hierarchy and
get documentation on the classes.
And finally,
we have a tool called open quickly
that was shown in the last session.
[Transcript missing]
In terms of code completion,
our code completion is called CodeSense.
It suggests completions
in line as you type.
It puts placeholder tokens
in your code for arguments.
And we have keyboard equivalents
that let you write code fast,
like control period for completing
now or you can also hit tab.
We have control comma for showing
the completion list and we have
control slash and control shift slash
for showing the completion list.
So you don't need to type the
whole of anything essentially
as you're writing code in Xcode.
We saw edit all in scope and how it lets
you make simple common changes fast.
We even have a keystroke equivalent
for that so you don't need to take your
hands off the keyboard to invoke it.
As you're typing,
if you need to rename a local variable,
you can just hit command control
T while it's highlighted and
just start typing and it changes.
Such a time saver.
Of course, as a modern IDE,
we also have refactoring,
and we support most common refactorings.
And we don't just support
refactoring of your source code.
Mac OS X applications use resources
to represent a lot of things.
And those resources aren't
actually code themselves.
They're object archives
and things like that.
But we'll actually look into
them and change occurrences of
things like class names as you
rename them in your code as well.
and the rest of the team.
We have integration with
developer documentation such as
conceptual guides and framework
references and our documentation,
as I'm sure you found in the past day,
is automatically updated.
You can also create your own
documentation sets that are
available through the research
assistant and through the
documentation viewer right from Xcode.
We saw how Research Assistant gives
you only the most important
information that's specific to your
current context while you're coding,
and it stays wherever you put it,
so you can always find it on screen.
You don't have to hunt around
for where is this documentation
on what I'm typing right now.
It's always where you expect it to be.
Of course,
if your fingers have hardware keyboard
equivalents for other editors,
you can set up Xcode to behave like them.
You can add keyboard equivalents for
any editing command or any menu command.
And if you have operations that
you perform frequently that
are represented in the toolbar,
[Transcript missing]
and finally, we have text macros.
These are really handy and they let you
insert snippets of code into your code.
And we have a bunch of common text macros
set up right at the end of the edit menu.
For example,
you can just type a few characters
and hit the same code completion key
that you would for code sense and
you'll get a definition of a class.
Complete with placeholder tokens that
you can just rename and be done with.
We even support scripting within the IDE.
This isn't an embedded
scripting language.
Instead,
we allow you to write scripts for
any of the scripting languages
that are supported on Mac OS X,
Python, Ruby, Pearl,
Apple script and so on,
right within Xcode,
and then run those from keyboard
equivalents or from menu commands.
And these can actually be passed
information from within Xcode,
such as your current selection
or the selected file,
and operate on that and pass
information back to Xcode.
So now that we've written some code,
how do we design the
rest of our application?
We didn't really write a lot of
code to put up our user interface,
so how do we do that?
Well, if we go back to the demo,
First, let's see how our
About panel actually works.
Well, we use Interface Builder on
Mac OS X and on iPhone OS to build
our application user interfaces.
So I'm just gonna collapse
a couple things here.
[Transcript missing]
So here we see that the baffle
main window is also defined
in this main menu file.
We'll just close that up because
we're not going to edit that.
And instead,
we're going to open the main menu.
And of course,
we directly edit our menus in
Mac OS X in sort of the same
representation that you see on screen.
What's unique about this compared to
the designers you might be used to from
Visual Studio or Eclipse is that we're
not generating any code as you do this.
Instead,
we're generating object archives that
are just deserialized at runtime.
So the objects you're working with in
interface builder are in a sense the
objects that you're actually going to
work with once you run your application.
So this about baffle menu item,
we can just control click on
it or right click on it and see
a list of connections for it.
And one of its connections
is a sent action.
which it's hard to see here,
but it says order front standard about
panel and it's being sent to files owner.
And you can see as I mouse over this,
that files owner highlights in
our interface builder document
window in the lower left.
and this is a message that's
actually going to be sent at runtime.
And it's an Objective C message,
but just double clicking this
only lets us edit the text.
It doesn't take us to the
definition of that message,
because that message is actually
part of the Cocoa framework itself.
It's not anything we've had to implement.
Well, what do we do if we want to
implement our own About Panel?
We've already defined some code
for our About Panel in Xcode as
About Panel Window Controller.
I just dragged that in on the last demo.
So let's go back to Interface Builder.
And I just want to create an
About Panel Window Controller.
So I'm going to look for an object
in my Interface Builder library.
And this handy search field,
let me find that fast.
I'm going to drag it and drop
it straight into my main menu
Interface Builder document.
Of course, a generic object won't
really do us much good.
So I'm going to go to the identity
inspector and tell interface builder
that that should actually represent
an about panel window controller.
Now, how do I actually tell my menu item
that it should do something with
my about panel window controller?
Well, I can control click or right
click on it to see its actions.
And then instead of sending order front
standard about panel to file's owner,
I'm just going to drag that
connection to my about panel.
And Interface Builder pops
up a list of possible actions
that that panel can take,
that object can take.
I'm going to select show window.
And that's it,
I've changed this connection.
No code is generated.
and I haven't had to write any
additional code to wire this up.
Now let's actually lay out this window.
Well, we're going to create a new
interface builder document for that,
which just contains a plain window.
We already have our window here,
but let's change its name to
something more appropriate,
like AboutBaffle.
and just to be on the safe side,
I'm going to save it immediately.
As always, save early and often.
I'm not expecting
Interface Builder to crash.
That's not why I'm saving.
I just like to save for my own security.
I'm going to navigate to where
we put our baffle project
and add this to baffle Cocoa.
I'm going to call it about panel.
and save it.
Interface builder will ask me if I want
to add it to an open project in Xcode.
This is because our tools are integrated.
Even though we have
special purpose tools,
they do talk to each other
and learn about each other.
So I'm not just going to tell interface
builder to add this to my project.
I'm also going to tell it to add
it to the baffle Cocoa target.
and you can see that it now knows
about the bafflecoco project.
And that means I can tell it that its
owner isn't just a generic object,
but is actually going to be
and about panel window controller.
So what is this file zoner thing?
Well, it represents the object that owns
this interface builder document.
Because an interface builder document
is really only part of an object graph.
There has to be some way to hook it
in to the rest of your application.
And that's file zoner.
So this file zoner object here
is really a proxy to this about
panel window controller right here.
Of course, I need to tell that
about the window itself,
so I'm just going to drag from its
window connection to the window.
I'm going to put a view in the
window for our Fancy About panel.
I'm going to use Quartz
Composer for that view.
Let's type Quartz into the search field.
We got our Quartz Composer
view as the first hit.
I'm just going to resize this
so it fills the entire window.
And I'm going to set its sizing through
our springs and struts mechanism.
So it stays the same size as the window.
And finally,
because our fancy about panel is
going to push data to this view,
I'm just going to drag from
this credits view to this view.
Connection on FileZoner,
straight to the view itself.
That means our
About Panel Window Controller doesn't
just know about
the window that it's managing,
but it also knows about a view inside it.
So we didn't have to look up that view
by ID in code or anything like that.
We can just use that as
an instance variable.
Now I can save this and close and close.
And if I build and go,
and show my about panel,
we get our new fancy about panel.
I'm just going to put this over
here and go back to slides and talk
a little bit about what we've done.
So Interface Builder, like I said,
is our human interface design
tool for Mac OS X and iPhone OS.
And it edits a live object graph
that gets serialized to an archive.
So your code and your interface are wired
together at runtime as you load these.
And that wiring together takes
place automatically through Cocoa.
It's not a code generator.
It's not generating reams of
Objective C or C code to build
that interface with comments
around it saying don't edit this.
At the same time,
it's also not doing anything that you
can't do in code with a bit more work.
So if you want to instantiate
a button dynamically,
you can.
You don't have to create an
interface builder document
just to contain that button.
And it's really a tool for everyone.
Because it isn't a code generator,
because it doesn't follow bad patterns,
experienced professional Cocoa developers
have been using interface builder
throughout Cocoa's existence.
It's not a newbie tool.
And you can also give
it to your designers.
Because Cocoa follows a model
view controller architecture,
you can put together sort
of a prototype interface,
hand it over to designers who
understand interface builder
and how to work with it.
And as long as they preserve
all of your connections,
they can make the interface as
slick as they want it to be using
features like core animation.
And it'll still just
hook up to your code.
And this is also how you do localization.
You hand over your interface builder
documents to your localizers.
They can open them up,
and change the text and change the
metrics so that you get a pixel perfect
localization even in other languages.
For example,
German text is typically about 30%
larger than English text to say the
same thing and you won't just want
to automatically expand every control
by 30%. Sometimes you might want
to move things to a separate line.
Sometimes you might want what
is one line in English to be
two lines in German and so on.
Interface Builder gives you
the flexibility to have tweaked
localizations for every language and
locale that you're delivering in.
Now, one thing I didn't show
is Quartz Composer.
I showed you the result
of Quartz Composer,
but it actually works a
lot like Interface Builder.
You create objects and you wire them
together in a graph called a composition.
And just like Interface Builder,
it doesn't generate code.
It just generates a graph of
objects that you can load and
connect your code to at runtime.
But again,
it doesn't do anything that you
can't do in code if you want to
invest a little bit more work in it.
If you have a completely
dynamic system that you want
to generate a composition for,
you can do that.
Quartz Composer is a
designer-specific tool.
Fortunately,
thanks to Model View Controller,
you can create a basic
placeholder composition,
decide what inputs it needs,
what inputs that you're going
to hook to from your code,
and then toss it over the
wall to your designers.
They can spend the effort on making it
slick and they can apply their unique
experience and they can hand you back
a version that you can just drop into
your code and that will just work.
Now, we talked about designing your
application and editing your code,
but what about your data?
Well, we do have data design tools, too,
and we have a framework for managing
your data in Mac OS X called Core Data.
I'm not going to talk too much
about this because we have
several sessions tomorrow on it,
but it lets you do entity relationship
modeling of your data and manage
its persistence from within Xcode.
And it really implements the
model-in-model-view controller.
One of the features that this gets you
if you're doing Mac OS X application
development is seamless,
effortless undo and redo.
And again, it's not a code generator,
but if you do want to create models at
runtime and use those with Core Data,
you can do it.
It just requires writing a little code.
So there's one thing that
I showed in the demo,
and that's this kind of undulating blue,
but there was nothing on it.
Well, we were gonna give credit
to the technologies that
we're using in our demo.
Joar is going to help us debug
why we weren't seeing that.
Hi, my name is Joar Wingfor,
I'm also a developer on the Xcode team.
As Chris pointed out,
we expected to have a list of names
showing up in the about panel,
every name showing up for a couple
of seconds to then be replaced
by the next name in the list.
And to do that, we had set up a recurring
timer in our code,
and every time the timer fires,
it would invoke a callback
method in our code.
So to debug that,
I'm going to drop down into the
debugger by setting a breakpoint
in that callback method.
I'm going to expand the window a bit.
Now, as you've seen in earlier sessions,
we can actually get most of our debugging
work done right here in the editor.
There are three basic
things to debugging.
You want to be able to set breakpoints.
You want to be able to
step through your code.
And you want to be able
to view your memory.
And you can get all of that
done right here in the editor.
So to the left of the editor window,
we have the editor gutter where you
can set and manage your breakpoint.
On top of the editor,
right above the navigation bar that
Chris introduced to you earlier,
we have the debugger strip
that we have seen before.
Going through the debugger
strip from left to right,
We have a popup showing all the
threads running in this application.
Next to that we have a bunch
of stepper controls that allows
you to step through your code.
And to the right of the
rightmost in the debugger strip,
we have a popup that shows you the
call stack of the selected thread.
To view memory,
we have data tips that you might
have probably seen in other sessions.
Data tips shows you data structures
and objects that you have in scope.
And in the data tip you have,
from left to right,
you have the type of the variable,
the name of the variable,
and the value of the variable.
So for an object, that would be the
address of the variable.
You can also drill
down into the data tip.
In case of an object,
drilling down would allow you to see the
instance variables of that object and
the instance variables of the superclass.
If you want to get to more advanced
functionality or get a better
overview over your debugging,
we also have a dedicated debugger window.
[Transcript missing]
The debugger window probably
looks a lot more like what you're
used to from other environments.
In top left,
we have a threads list that allows
you to select threads and show the
call stacks of the selected thread.
And next to that,
we have the variables list
showing arguments to functions,
local and global variables,
and even registers.
And below that, we have a source editor.
You can also open the console window.
The console window serves
two basic purposes.
First, it shows textual output
from your application,
typically debug log statements,
but it also allows you to
interact directly with a
debugger using debugger commands.
The underlying debugger
technology for Xcode is GDB,
the open source debugger.
So if you know GDB or if you want to
look up the commands in the man page,
you can use all of them
in the Xcode console.
We also have a number of
components to the Xcode debugger
that I'm not showing here.
We have a disassembly view that shows
you the raw instructions of your program.
We have a memory browser where you can
view the raw memory of your application.
And we have a dedicated breakpoints
window where you can add and modify
and manage all of your breakpoints
in your project in one place.
For this demo, I'm going to do the
debugging back in the editor.
So I'm closing this debugger window now.
This is the callback method
where I'm supposed to update
the name in the about panel.
We will do that on this
last line of code here.
And the next name to be updated
is this next credited variable.
And as you can see from the data tip,
the value is nil.
You can also see that
the name is red here,
meaning that this variable was
updated on the last step of execution.
Whenever you see a red value
in the debugger in Xcode,
that means that that
value was just updated.
I'm scanning through this method.
Nothing really sticks out as wrong.
I will have to step through this.
To do that,
I can grab the program counter over here.
That's the red arrow.
I can just drag that back up to
the top of the method to start
over and step through the code.
So the first line of code here is called
to a method called allCredits that you
find right above the method that I'm in.
So if I hit the step into button,
I'm stepping into that method,
stepping over the first line of code,
and then inspecting that variable,
we see that, well, that's nil, too.
So we seem to have the problem already
here in the first line of this method.
And just by inspection, I can see that
I'm trying to look for the
path of a file called credit.
But if you check over here,
you see that the file is
actually called credits.
So,
it's a -- we have typed the wrong name.
So, just by correcting that,
I should be able to fix this problem.
So, I'm going to hit build and go.
Launching the application,
opening the About panel.
Since I left the breakpoint around,
the breakpoint hit again.
And using data tips,
I can now inspect and see that this time
I do have the values that I expected.
And if I disable the breakpoint
and continue execution,
You can see that the bound panel now
works as we intended from the beginning.
So if I could go back to slides, please.
As you might expect, in Xcode,
you can use breakpoints to simply
stop on a symbol or a line of code.
For every breakpoint,
you can assign a condition,
and this condition would need
to be satisfied for the debugger
to stop on the breakpoint.
You can also assign one or more actions,
and these actions would be executed as
the debugger stops on the breakpoint.
There are several different
types of actions to choose from,
but the two most useful types of
actions would either be a log statement,
where you provide a printf style
format string to the debugger that
can reference this data in scope.
So you can output data to the
debugger console much like you
would do with a debug log statement.
The other useful type of debugger action,
the other useful type of breakpoint
action would be to execute
any type of debugger command.
One of the more commonly used debugger
commands for breakpoint actions would
probably be to print the backtrace
of where you have stopped execution.
Thirdly,
you can also set your breakpoints to
automatically continue after having
executed your breakpoint actions.
And this would typically be used for,
for example, if you have a breakpoint set
up with a logging action.
So you would have your breakpoint
log something and then just
automatically continue.
You could also often see breakpoints
being set up to log the backtrace
and then automatically continue.
Very useful.
Finally, as you create new
breakpoints in your project,
the breakpoints are associated with that
project and persisted with that project.
But you often have code shared between
several projects and you might want to
have the same breakpoint set in all of
the projects where you use that code.
And in these cases,
you can change your breakpoints
from being project scope breakpoints
to be global breakpoints.
Meaning that whenever you
open a project in Xcode,
you will have access to that breakpoint.
It's a very convenient way of
sharing breakpoints between projects.
So, suppose you have a game like in this
case and you wanted to run full screen.
If when you're running your
application full screen,
you can't interact with the standard
debugger UI at the same time.
So, one way of solving that problem
would be to use remote debugging
from a separate machine.
You can also in many cases
use the Xcode mini debugger.
Even if you're not running full screen,
it is sometimes a bit too intrusive
to have to switch back and forth
between your application and Xcode.
In these cases,
you can also use the Xcode Mini Debugger.
The Xcode Mini Debugger looks like this.
It's a small window that floats
on top of your application.
It starts out small like this,
but as you pause execution
or as you hit the breakpoint,
it expands to show you the
familiar in-editor debugger
UI with the data strips,
with the breakpoints,
and with data tips to show you memory.
Finally,
we have these four separate ways for
you to interact with the Xcode debugger.
There is the rich,
traditional debugger UI provided
by the debugger window.
There is the debugger strip that
allows you to stay focused on your
code and get most of your debugging
done right there in the editor.
For full screen applications
and less intrusive debugging,
we have the mini debugger.
And for textual output and for direct
access to the debugger command line,
we have the debugger console.
and moving on, this is my second part.
I'm going to talk to you a little
bit about performance tools.
Performance
Performance analysis is very important,
and the ability to troubleshoot
performance problems is very important.
For that reason,
we have a great set of performance
tools available on Mac OS X.
and the rest of the team.
Too many to talk to here,
but I'm going to give you a
bit of an overview over our
flagship performance tool,
being instruments.
In this case, I, well, so,
if I launch instruments,
It will create a new document for me.
This document will be used to collect
performance data from my application.
Before I can do that, though,
I need to let instruments know
what type of performance data that
I'm interested in at this moment.
A very convenient way of doing that
is to pick one of the predefined
[Transcript missing]
Typically,
when you are using instruments,
you have some sort of idea
of what type of performance
problems that you are looking for.
And then you would pick
the appropriate template.
For this demo,
I'm going to pick the blank
template and instead I'm going
to manually pick the types of
instrumentation that I'm interested in.
So, in order for you to get an overview
over the different types of
instrumentation available in instruments,
you would open the library window.
In the library window,
you will find all of the different
types of instrumentation that you
can perform in your application.
And you can pick and
choose from this list.
For this demo,
I'm going to look at file IO using
the file activity instrument.
I'm going to look at memory leaks
using the leaks instrument and finally,
[Transcript missing]
Since I already have my application
up and running here in the background,
I can simply attach to that application
from instruments by selecting it
from the popup and hitting record.
[Transcript missing]
Instrument attaches to the application
and starts to collect performance data.
The instrument window has a
couple of different parts.
So the topmost part here
is the timeline view.
The timeline view is designed to give
you a high-level representation of the
data as it is collected by instruments.
It's also designed to give you,
to make it easy for you to
immediately pick out any performance
problems that you have in your code.
Below the timeline,
you find a detail view.
The detail view shows all of
the performance data collected.
It allows you to filter that
data and to drill down into that
data and look at it in detail.
So I can stop here.
And so for the CPU sampler here,
there are basically no peaks.
CPU-wise, we seem to do fine.
There is one peak here for memory leaks
that we might want to take a look at.
But for this demo,
I'm going to focus on the fact that
we have this recurring file I.O.
operations here.
Doesn't seem quite right.
And this is probably too
small for you to see,
but here in the detail view,
you can see that all of them
are accessing the same file,
our credits file,
where we have these names that
we display in the about panel.
By selecting one of these entries
here in the detail view and
opening the extended detail,
I can also see the backtrace
to this file IO event.
And if I find my code
here in this backtrace,
I know that this is probably something
that I could do something about.
The backtrace is color coded by library.
So you can easily pick out
the system libraries and
separate them from your code.
So in this case,
I have my code down here.
And I can double click on
the last frame in my code,
go back to baffle, and see that, well,
we have this accessor method here
where we request to have this list of
credits where we pick out the next name
from the list to show in the panel.
And we actually reread this
This would be a problem
that we would want to fix.
And I'd like to go back to slides,
please.
Instruments is this umbrella type
application that provides many,
many different types of instrumentation.
You can select several of these
different types of instrumentation
and run them side by side,
have them collect data at the same
time and present them to you in
a way that makes a lot of sense.
We have these many great data mining and
visualization tools that makes it very
easy for you to correlate the data and
to pick out the performance problems.
Instruments also provides
very nice Xcode integration.
You can launch instruments
from Xcode and you can also get
back to Xcode from instruments.
There are a number of other
tools that have been mentioned
earlier already at the conference.
So instruments, if you're new to the Mac,
new to Apple,
instruments should be your first choice.
But if you're really
into performance tools,
there are a lot of other very interesting
tools for you to take a look at,
in particular,
perhaps Sharks and Sharkenquartz debug.
Most of the tools come with
command line utilities.
Being able to access the functionality
provided by these tools at the
command line is very useful when
you need to do remote performance
troubleshooting or if you want
to automate your performance analysis
and call these tools from scripts.
A very important underlying
technology for instruments,
a technology unfortunately not available
on the phone or on the iPod touch,
but available to you if you
run your phone application.
In the simulator is Dtrace.
Dtrace is an open source technology
created by Sun and made part of Mac OS X.
It's very interesting and I would
encourage you to take a look at that.
And with that, I'd like to hand the
stage back to Anders.
Thanks, Joar.
All right.
So you've designed and edited and built,
debugged and tuned your application.
What do you want to do?
You want to ship it.
So let's talk briefly about deployment.
You might burn a disk and, you know,
cut down trees to build
a package and all that.
But Internet delivery is becoming more
and more popular and fairly common.
That said,
first impressions are still important.
So you might want to have logos.
You might want to have basically
virtual box art that shows up.
How can you do that?
Well, first of all,
how do you install the
application on the user's system?
There's two basic options.
There's drag and drop,
which you've probably all seen
for a Macintosh application.
You just have a single icon that the
user can drag and drop onto their desktop
or onto their applications folder,
more likely.
Or you can have an installer package.
Mac OS X does have a built-in installer.
Let's take a look at that.
Keeping in mind simplicity,
drag and drop is the preferred
way when you can do it.
Because of the bundled technology,
you can put the code, the resources,
any kind of plug-ins that you need,
help pages, documentation,
all those sorts of things.
You can actually put that
into a single bundle.
iWork, for example,
puts even the templates,
localized templates inside of the bundle.
So you can have a single
drag and drop application.
And that's fairly easy
for users to understand.
They can also drag it to the
trash if they don't want it,
those kinds of things.
So for simplicity,
robustness reasons and flexibility,
do drag and drop install
if you can at all do it.
And one way to do drag and
drop and still have a nice
experience is to use a disk image.
You can create a disk image and put
your application in the disk image.
You can add customized compositions and
custom artwork in the background that,
for example, says, you know,
drag this icon to the application
folder with your branding,
that kind of thing.
The contents are compressed and
users can mount the disk image
on the desktop and access the
contents without decompressing it.
Disk images are also great for
Internet travel because they don't
have resource forks or metadata
or any of that kind of stuff that
tends to disappear out in the ether.
So they're just a flat file and
all the goodies are contained
inside of the contents of it.
This may be a new concept.
Well, it's a fairly familiar
concept on Windows World,
too.
I think there's ISO, some other formats.
But on Mac, it's typically called a DMG,
disk image format.
There's something interesting also
called Internet-enabled disk images.
So you can have disk
images that can contain,
for example, a license agreement.
And when the user goes to access
the contents of the disk image,
the license agreement is shown
and they can agree or disagree.
And, of course, it only opens up if they
agree to the license.
So that might be a good way if
you want to have some kind of open
source license or a commercial
license on the disk image.
There's also automatic -- optional
automatic extract and discard a disk
image for maybe novice users who
don't even know what a disk image
is but just want to know what it is.
So you can have disk images that are just
a little bit more complex and you just
want the icon to show up on the screen.
So how do you create one?
Well, there's disk utility.
That's a graphical utility
that's on the Mac OS,
not even the developer tools.
That's actually installed
with Mac OS by default.
But there's also command line utility,
and that's extra interesting from Xcode.
I mentioned targets earlier.
One thing I didn't mention is,
besides building an application
or a plug-in or a framework,
a target could be set up to
just invoke a shell script,
and that shell script,
or indeed any script, Ruby script,
Python script, could do anything.
So you could set up an Xcode
target to invoke this HDI utility.
You'll find lots of documentation
about that in the developer pages.
And then you could that way
create a disk image automatically
as part of your build.
So that's a great way to do that.
If you don't want to create a disk image,
you don't want to sort of go
branding maybe isn't that important,
you can just simply zip
up your built application.
Just create a zip file from it,
select and finder, say compress,
and then distribute that.
That's also compressed and it's
about as standard as it gets.
Most people have heard of that.
There are times when it's
appropriate to use the installer,
and if you need to use it,
by all means do.
If drag and drop doesn't work for you,
for example,
you need to install a kernel extension,
spelled correctly with an S, actually,
but extension, launch daemons,
other kinds of things.
You may want to install specialized
things in the file system.
In that case,
go ahead and use an installer package.
There's a great tool that's
called Package Maker,
and that's in the utilities
folder of the developer folder.
And that lets you build up the
whole workflow for where you see the
welcome screen to the license screen,
maybe options for installing
optional features,
those kinds of things.
It's a great tool.
There's a command line
equivalent of that,
and that's called PKG Util, and that,
again, can be invoked from a
shell script within Xcode.
I mentioned these things,
shell scripts being invoked from Xcode.
There are some great sessions on
Xcode introducing you to how to create
complex projects and how to really
take advantage of the build system,
and I encourage you to go to that
to see more about how to evoke these
kinds of things from the build system.
So in summary, Mac OS X and iPhone OS,
they provide a lot of functionality.
And if you're coming from
Eclipse or Visual Studio,
you're not only used to a different IDE,
but you're also used to a different
set of libraries and frameworks,
maybe a whole different way
of structuring your program.
So hopefully we've introduced in
this session some of the differences
and also some of the similarities.
In some cases,
the difference is only terminology.
For example,
we use the term bundle on Mac OS X.
Well, it's kind of like a jar file or
it's kind of like an assembly.
It just packages up all the
stuff that is needed for,
let's say, an application to access its
resources and those kinds of things.
So some of the concepts are different.
We have lots of good documentation.
There's also good sessions.
We'll provide some links to that.
And sometimes the only
difference is the terminology.
OS X overview.
There's an Xcode overview and a
Mac OS X as well as iPhone OS overview.
So there's a lot of good
reviews that are really good.
Xcode's welcome panel.
I showed that.
There's a lot of good information
accessible right off of that,
as well as many sessions here at WWDC.
I should say,
here are some of the related sessions.
I'll leave the slide
up for a few moments.
I'd like to bring up Michael Jurvets
on stage at this point.
We're going to go to Q&A here.
We're going to have just
a short time for Q&A,
but come see us in the
lab for more questions.
We wanted to make sure we
gave a complete overview here.